# MacOS Setup


## Starting from Scratch: Install CodeIgniter for our `ci-app` project using Composer
Assuming starting from: 
`/Users/macbookpro/dev/php/github/php/`

```bash
cd codeigniter/deployment
composer create-project codeigniter4/appstarter ci-app
cd ci-app
``` 

---


## Configure the project with the .env file
- Rename `env` file to `.env`
    ```bash
    mv env .env
    ```
- Open the `.env` file
  - Set the environment to `development`
  - Set app.baseURL to match your Apache setup
    ```
    CI_ENVIRONMENT = development
    ...
    app.baseURL = 'http://ciapp.localhost:8080/'
    ```
- Save the file.

---

## Deployment Folder
We use the same `deployment` folder for different versions of our project to be served by Apache: this is to avoid have to reconfigure Apache Virtual Hosts each time we switch versions of the project.
 
Create a `logs` and `writable` folders inside the `deployment` directory to store log files and output generated by Apache/CodeIgniter:
```bash
deployment_dir="/Users/macbookpro/dev/php/github/php/codeigniter-4/hollingworth/deployment/"
mkdir $deployment_dir/ci-app
mkdir $deployment_dir/ci-app/public
mkdir $deployment_dir/logs
mkdir $deployment_dir/writable
mkdir $deployment_dir/writable/cache
mkdir $deployment_dir/writable/logs
``` 

#### Set Permissions for the `writable` directory
Avoid "*CodeIgniter\Cache\Exceptions\CacheException Cache unable to write to...*" errors by setting the correct permissions for the `writable` directory:
```bash
writable_dir=$deployment_dir/writable
sudo chmod -R 755 $writable_dir 
sudo chown -R _www:_www $writable_dir 
```

In the app/Config/Paths.php file, set the writable directory path to point to this new `writable` folder:
```php
public string $writableDirectory = '/Users/macbookpro/dev/php/github/php/codeigniter-4/hollingworth/deployment/writable';
```

### Copy files to the deployment folder
**NOTE:**: on macOS use "Bash", not the default "Zsh" terminal shell, as `cp -R` behaves differently in Zsh (omits the hidden files lie `.env`).
- Set origin folder:
  ```bash
  origin_dir="/Users/macbookpro/dev/php/github/php/codeigniter-4/hollingworth/<section-folder>/ci-app"
  ```

- Copy the contents of the `ci-app` folder to the `deployment/ci-app` folder:
  ```bash
  cp -R $origin_dir "/Users/macbookpro/dev/php/github/php/codeigniter-4/hollingworth/deployment/"
  ```

---


## Setup CodeIgniter 4 with Apache Web Server

You can also configure a local web server Apache to serve your [myapp] project.
- See [install-macos](../../../docs/install-macos.md ) for initial Apache installation details.
- See the lesson for details: https://www.udemy.com/course/codeigniter-from-scratch/learn/lecture/39182242#overview

---

### Configure Apache Virtual Host

NOTE:
To see hidden file folders in Finder, use `CMD + SHIFT + . `
- httpd.conf **didn't show** in Finder search results

NOTE! On MacOS with Homebrew Apache (took me a *while* to find this out). 
Edit the Apache configuration file:
```bash
code /opt/homebrew/etc/httpd/httpd.conf
```
  
Uncomment the include for virtual hosts by removing the `#` at the beginning of the line:
```
# Virtual hosts
Include /opt/homebrew/etc/httpd/extra/httpd-vhosts.conf
```

Set the `ServerName` directive to avoid warnings. Find the line that starts with `#ServerName` and change it to:
```
# If your host doesn't have a registered DNS name, enter its IP address here.
ServerName [myapp].localhost
```

When using PHP with Apache, ensure the PHP module is loaded. Otherwise, Apache won't be able to process PHP files and will serve them as plain text.
Find and uncomment (or add) the following lines:
- `php_module`: to allow Apache to process PHP files
- `mod_rewrite`: to enable URL rewriting, which is essential for CodeIgniter's routing to work correctly (otherwise, you will encounter 404 errors when trying to access routes defined in CodeIgniter).
```
LoadModule php_module /opt/homebrew/opt/php@8.5/lib/httpd/modules/libphp.so
<IfModule php_module>
    <FilesMatch \.php$>
        SetHandler application/x-httpd-php
    </FilesMatch>
</IfModule>

LoadModule rewrite_module lib/httpd/modules/mod_rewrite.so

```

If getting *"AH01276: Cannot serve directory error"*: this means Apache successfully accessed the directory, but couldn't find an index file to serve and directory listing is disabled.
- Update the DirectoryIndex to include `index.php`. Find the line that starts with `DirectoryIndex` and change add `index.php` like so:
```    
DirectoryIndex index.php index.html
```


### Edit the virtual hosts file 
```bash
code /opt/homebrew/etc/httpd/extra/httpd-vhosts.conf
```

Add the following configuration to the file:
NOTE: `DocumentRoot` must point to the `public` folder inside the `[myapp]` directory, the same applies to the `<Directory>` directive.

```apache
<VirtualHost *:8080>
    DocumentRoot "/Users/macbookpro/dev/php/github/php/codeigniter-4/hollingworth/deployment/[myapp]/public"
    ServerName   [myapp].localhost
    ErrorLog     "/Users/macbookpro/dev/php/github/php/codeigniter-4/hollingworth/deployment/logs/error_log"
    CustomLog    "/Users/macbookpro/dev/php/github/php/codeigniter-4/hollingworth/deployment/logs/access_log" common

    <Directory "/Users/macbookpro/dev/php/github/php/codeigniter-4/hollingworth/deployment/[myapp]/public">
        AllowOverride All
        Require all granted
    </Directory>
</VirtualHost>
```

Restart Apache to apply the changes:
```bash
sudo apachectl restart
```

1. Verify PHP is loaded:
```bash
httpd -M | grep php
```
- You should see `php_module` in the output.


Check Apache Error Logs
Look at the error log for specific details:
```bash
tail -f /Users/macbookpro/dev/php/github/php/codeigniter-4/hollingworth/deployment/logs/error_log
```

Or check the main Apache error log:
```bash
tail -f /opt/homebrew/var/log/httpd/error_log
```

---

### Access the Application
In Browser, navigate to `http://[myapp].localhost:8080` to see the app start page.    


---

## Built-in PHP Server
**Conclusion**
On MacOS, I got a lot of problems with the built-in PHP server, so I recommend using Apache for local development also...

In the terminal, navigate to the `ci-app` directory if you're not already there:
Start the built-in PHP server:
```bash
php spark serve
```

Open your web browser and navigate to `http://localhost:8080` to see the CodeIgniter welcome page.

Stop the server by pressing `CTRL + C` in the terminal when you're done.

**Note:** If getting "Failed to listen on localhost:8080 (reason: Address already in use)", it means another process is using that port. You can either:

Stop that process:
 - On MacOS/Linux, find the process ID (PID) using:
   ```bash
   lsof -i TCP:8080
   ```
 - Then kill the process using:
   ```bash
   kill -9 <PID>
   ``` 

Or use a different port by specifying it when starting the server, e.g., `php spark serve --port 8081`.


---

### Apache
SEE README-apache-[windows|macos].md for Apache installation and configuration instructions.


